we all know people who have been
affected by disease could be somebody in
our family could be a friend but we may
not know what the revolutionary
treatments and how to think about the
healthcare system in its entirety we
probably don't know any of the truth of
that at least I didn't even though this
is related to an industry that I'm very
intimately involved with and that's why
I love Travis Kristofferson and what he
did in tripping over the truth to
metabolic theory of cancer which is a
table remark asam slash cancer and then
also his new book curable which talks
about the medical system at large I
can't wait to share this podcast with
you guys I'd literally think it's one of
the most important podcasts I've ever
recorded so I hope you guys enjoy it and
I hope you share it because it really
contains some super important
information enjoy
Travis Kristofferson you're here earlier
yeah great to have you man I mean when I
read tripping over the truth the
metabolic theory of cancer I forget
where I first saw it but I read the book
and my jaw was just open for pretty much
the whole book and then I was like okay
everything's changed the world's changed
this book exists now everybody's gonna
think about cancer completely
differently and we're on to the new
paradigm of treating this disease and I
put it out and I was like here it goes
ready and then it went around a little
bit but like people are stubborn with
their thoughts and what should have been
a boomerang of an Enlightenment and
questioning and thoughts and like
reevaluating something that's you know a
major issue in our culture didn't do
that in that kind of way that it
potentially could and if you look back
through time of course that makes sense
because nothing ever happens that way
but it's just such an important
revelation that you put forward both in
that book and then all the other
subsequent revelations you put forward
and curable so I'm just really excited
to talk to you about it and at least
maybe give that boomerang a little spots
more you know an increase the 50 year
lag time that we see on medical
treatments actually being adopted
maybe you increase that does I don't
know forty nine point eight years or so
I don't know whatever effect we're gonna
have but it's just great to have you
here man and to be able to talk about
these issues yeah it's it's there there
was a book written on the nature of
scientific revolutions I can't remember
what it's a very common book but if they
follow that path it's it's this long lag
where people debate it and then and then
you know there's kind of some anger on
both sides and then there's this sort of
a kind of acceptance phase and but it's
a lot almost a lifetime and that's that
Max Planck quote that before you know
new ideas are introduced you almost have
to wait for the old generation the old
guard to die off first and I was like
you I was when I first read Tom Seyfried
book cancer as a metabolic disease just
shocked by the amount and the quality of
data to support this new theory of
cancer and then this reconfigures you
know how you
treat and how you approach it in this
whole industry that is in you know
healthcare is now the number one
industry in the world
so it was shocking to me yeah how does
you know how do not more people know
about this but then you realize the
inertia behind the current system yeah
yeah well there's the inertia behind the
current system because every a lot of
people listening this is probably like
well does it's the number one industry
in the world of course there's gonna be
resistance because it's all about the
money well but then you look at
something like how when they figured out
the cure for scurvy in the British Royal
Navy it took 50 years for them to get
[__] lemons on their boat you know
people just dying
I'm just getting thrown overboard as
shark food you know from [__] scurvy
and then they're like well okay fifty
years I guess we'll follow this cure
that it's been already shown right and
then in every different case even when
there's not money involved when it's
actually costing people money it takes
time and I think that's what you do such
a good job in curable with is it's not
just about the money because there is a
lot about the money and we'll talk about
that in some of the ways that the
financial structure of the healthcare
system
is disadvantageous from the funding of
the studies to the fee-for-service that
the doctors get there's a lot of issues
that do involve money so it's not about
not about the money but it's also about
the way that the mind thinks like we're
stubborn [__] and we do not
like new ideas coming to dethrone the
existing ideas yeah we get stuck in
those mental paradigms
yeah scurvy was a weird case they this
guy James Lynn proved it unequivocally
on an you know back when the Royal Navy
was out for months at a time and
literally hundreds of thousands of
people were dying from scurvy and that's
a lack of vitamin C for anything get
there just watched pirate movies and
said yeah [__] school it was like an
actual disease people died yeah and and
so yeah he published this it was lemon
juice it cured these guys and talked
about a horrible disease so you run out
of vitamin C you can make collagen and
they described as like lassitude of the
knees and the beautification of the gum
so you're just basically your your
connective tissues
melting away and and then so he gave him
all these you know that some people
thought it was the salt water that malt
was a cure and he gave him lemons and
these two guys that were in this throws
asked Ruby got up and started helping
everybody else he published it and then
there was a huge lag before they
implemented it and you know as we were
talking about to it
the fecal transplant was the same
process they knew about this foresee def
in 1958 this guy published unequivocal
data in for people that it was a
basically a cure and again we had this
lag until about 2015
so in and the seed if the c-diff thing
is crazy because like the cure rate for
and I have it somewhere here in my notes
but I can't exactly find it at the
moment but curate if I recall is
something like ninety-six percent with
the ankle transplant which is actually
taking somebody else's gut microbiome
through their feces they have ways to
actually filter out the [__] part now
and just keep the yeah keep the bio
probiotics but you transplant that
directly into somebody else's colon and
the colon is where you know all like see
diff infections take hold which is a
particularly pathogenic and aggressive
bacteria that antibiotics only work what
like sub forty percent of the time or
like thirty percent of those I think
it's seventy-five but then it drops down
to forty and then to twenty so you know
once you get caught in that cycle here
you're pretty much [__]
I mean meanwhile if you can go and go
but to but with the hose I mean it's not
that easy you need a blender or is it a
doctor you know but basically you get a
healthy you get some healthy poop in
your colon game over
you're done you don't have to deplete
your entire body's microbiome you don't
have to go do all this stuff you just
need to have someone [__] in your but
there's such a you know that story as I
dug into it and curable was so
remarkable because it goes back to the
1940s in World War two and the the Nazis
had just won a campaign in northern
Africa against the British and all of a
sudden they had this horrible outbreak
of dysentery and so the Nazis flew in
their chemists or doctors everybody and
what they noticed was the local Arabs
were we're fine they were they were just
somehow weren't affected by this and so
they've tracked that
they found out they were getting sick
but they'd walk behind a camel and when
it defecated they'd scoop it up and eat
it and so the idea was somehow there's
some bacteria in this camel dung that's
out competing this dysentery who did
they have that idea did they just think
that like eating poo is the magical cure
no they passed yeah he had established
you know germ theory at that point I
knew that was it
so they isolated it and they gave it to
the you know to the soldiers and it
worked and it was some I can't member
sell this back back to your solace or
something a Silla subtilis that's it
that's yeah and that was one of the you
know that was the kind of the main line
for dysentery at the time and then it
was about two years later the penicillin
came out so it was really interesting at
that moment when you think about if we
would have taken a different path
instead of the antibiotic path I mean
they were lifesavers no doubt about it
but if we could have appreciated what
that bacteria was doing versus just
wiping it out with antibiotics medicine
would have taken a different course but
it didn't and so we used antibiotics you
know everybody knows a story you get
pathogenic resistance and so forth and
so this has always been a problem and in
the 50s when people would get they give
antibiotics perioperative right before
surgery to prevent an infection and a
lot of these people would develop C def
app in the aftermath and so the stock
goes okay because the antibiotics are
wiping out all of your friendly
probiotic bacteria like what people may
not understand is bacteria are
perpetually in competition with the
fungus with everything in your gut right
so an antibiotic is like a nuclear bomb
it's like Agent Orange it's coming
through to the whole forest not
discriminating which plants it's killing
killing the good ones killing the bad
ones wiping everything out and then that
gives ground for whatever is still
hanging on whatever's alive and whatever
wants to be the most aggressive at that
point in time to just flourish and
sometimes that's c-diff right sometimes
it's not sometimes it's actually yeast
that takes the place of all of these
that's why there's so many yeast
infections that come after an antibiotic
course you know it's like whatever is
there it's just kind of like oh wow you
know new free ground nothing to compete
with me I'm just gonna rush right
through
right and so like this blank canvas and
that's what's happening and that's
what's creating the the fertile ground
for c-diff to take hold that's what was
happening when the bacillus subtilis was
actually competing against the
pathogenic bacteria that works causing
the dysentery right it's just
introducing that natural level of
competition and having something that
out competes the existing you know
pathogenic back right right right and so
this doctor in 1958 in Denver had that
same epiphany in the back you know think
it's 58 all feces was just thought of it
as a disease vector right and this guy
had this subtle you know but epiphany
this moment of intuition that perhaps
fecal matter was this ecosystem like
you'd like you described this whole
ecosystem and he called it
reestablishing the balance of nature so
he took some feces from a maternity ward
nearby and and these patients have had
c-diff and and just you know put an
enema in and that was it it was a cure
for four patients and so this was
published in the journal a surgery in
1958 and you know it just never caught
on and for obvious reasons I think that
it's just it's much easier to give a
pill than fecal transplants the same
reason than probably even in the even in
the military even the German with the
German soldiers they moved to penicillin
when penicillin was Bennett and they're
like well we could out we could drink
camel [__] or and then it would actually
work but we can take this pill and it'll
mostly work but the problem is it only
temporarily works it's just wiping
everything out one time it's not
establishing any kind of bacterial you
know colonies that can actually prevent
this from happening in the future it's
actually making you more vulnerable but
they're not thinking long term now well
I get it again I just take more pills
and I get it again and I just take more
pills and then the long-term cascading
effects of using that as the emergency
stopgap becomes a problem yeah yeah it's
a short-term short-sighted thinking
that's why I think that you know fecal
transplants are getting more established
now they're still slow well it was 2012
you said somewhere that they actually
got approved for 4c diff infection right
not even approved just enforcement
discretion so they it's not a formal
approval it's
still under this kind of veil of
uncertainty so it's still you know very
underrepresented it's still hard to get
and that's why in the early to that it
was kind of was interesting how the path
had followed in the early 2000s people
just found it on the internet it was
like a dy I do-it-yourself fecal
transplant and there was tens of
thousands people doing this every year
for cd4 for you know ulcerative colitis
Crohn's disease and so forth
and there was only a handful of doctors
doing it and it was a cure is like 94%
cure and then the six percent you just
did it again and it was a kid and the
FDA wrestled with this you know they
were gonna require to have an
investigational new drug paperwork which
is if anyone knows it's just like it's
off the table it's so much bureaucracy
how you even gonna do that because it's
poop
it's a poo like it's not gonna be
standardized and they were focused on
these long-term risk well what if you
know the patient gains weight down to
well these people are dying you know you
just they lose this this sort of the
recognition of the risk reward in that
moment yeah all right you're gonna gain
about a pound when that [__] gets put
into your ass and then you poop and then
you're gonna lose it again
right you know but I mean I do
understand what they're saying they had
that study on mice where like obese mice
were given the gut biomes of likes
active athletic mice and they were
switched and then the obese mice became
athletic the athletic mice became obese
so there's probably way more effects
which actually when you look at it make
it more interesting so it's kind of like
when you're looking for a sperm donor
right and you're looking for the dad
that you want like alright there's lots
of them that can get you pregnant
there's lots of fecal transplants that
can cure some of these bacterial
imbalances but you might want to get it
from someone who has a lot of other cool
out - bats - Jen you generally happy
like works out a lot you know maybe a
good love maker you know you want like a
survey super poop the super poops your
poop donors right would be Rich's [__]
they're just ballin on their [__] there
are now there's there's donors super
donors that have the perfect feces
specie bag so it's come a long way but
you know if we could have if that
research wasn't delayed so long now we
know you can transfer and
just behavior through fecal transplants
mm-hmm
so much of these bacteria you know I've
evolved with us for billions of years
and they are producing newer
transmitters they're almost guiding our
behavior so you know now I think there
was a study that came out about a month
ago on pancreatic cancer they found a
bacterial signature on the tumor and so
they they note they just took long term
pancreatic cancer survivors versus
people that didn't do well and they did
the fecal transplant into the mice and
they were able to confer that that
ability to respond to the treatment so
it can you know to transplant the
ability to live longer with pancreatic
cancer so almost every disease State
we're finding is you know somehow
influenced by they've got biome
ketogenic diet which was used for
epilepsy when you give a mouse raise in
a germ-free environment so it's got no
microbiome or given antibiotics Mouse
it's got epilepsy put it on a ketogenic
diet it doesn't work and so we always
thought it was well it's made hydroxy
butyrate or some of these you know
shifting and neurotransmitters but it's
something more even complex than that
hmm yeah that's really interesting i
mean the ketogenic diet is something you
talk a lot about in the tripping over
the truth and I want to get to that but
just one example just to go and we'll
talk more about cognitive biases but
just for people to understand how these
things are people are so resistant
because I think a lot of people might
think like well if this worked it would
be out there yeah not [__] true no
not [__] true like the guy who and
you tell the story and tripping over the
truth the guy who discovered that h
pylori caused ulcers in the stomach
everybody's like [__] off you quack like
you don't know anything and he's like
yeah I do it's really this is what
causes it and they're like no you know
it's not wrong you know they had their
own prevailing theory and then he was
like all right well I'm gonna drink h
pylori and you're gonna watch what
happens to my stomach like that's what
it took and then they were like oh yeah
he's right he was given the Nobel Prize
yeah exactly did he actually get the
Nobel Prize back so yeah well it was a
noble effort that he [__] I made I
mean it is really the right I mean but
what lengths do you have to go to to
show this to like to
to overcome the prevailing attitudes and
again like one of the heartbreaking
stories is that of the radical
mastectomy but I'm sure well you know I
want to get to that as well but it's
just the prevailing the prevailing way
takes a lot of time and research and
energy to overturn it's the same with
the psychedelic medicine revolution like
we were on to this a long time ago
through the 60s in the initial studies
that we were doing and now again 50
years later long enough for the people
who are academically in power at that
time to pass on and to retire or die or
move on then all of a sudden wow we're
back and there's a new paradigm that's
actually coming hopefully you know we
get a little bit more cognitively
flexible and can speed that process up
because we had to take 50 years you know
we may not have 50 years anymore yeah we
might not have 50 years to solve this
healthcare these healthcare issues
because there's the problems are
pressing on us hard Yeah right now yeah
I don't know how you solve that you know
other than the take-home messages keep
an open mind it's a lot of it is just
institutional when you look at
oncologists day to day job it's it's
tough I mean they're churning through
patients they only have so much time
patient comes in and what about this
what about curcumin what about ketogenic
diet and they don't have time to answer
although it's number one and they and
then the the lot of them will like to
have this modicum of control over the
patient because there's only so many
tools in their toolbox and so they they
they fall back in that line there's not
an update up and when you look at the
ketogenic diet again like fecal
transplant you just you weigh the risk
reward okay there there is there's not
an fda-approved trial but there's a hell
of a lot of data suggest it could work
yeah what do I have to lose you know you
might have a terminal illness and it's a
diet so there's a disconnect between say
that that sort of position of the well
there's not enough data to you know the
risk reward that the patients are
dealing with and maybe there isn't
enough data or maybe there is actually
adequate data but like one of the
cognitive bias you mentioned is the
availability heuristic which I think
applies here like you just move based
upon the
information that you have available
right like what do I know well I know
this I know chemo I know
radiology I know you know these things
so let's go that way
that's exactly right you know and it's
just a way that the brain works yeah and
it's it's medicine I tried to make that
point in the book medicine
it used to be practice' below by a doc
he'd come with his little case there was
you know handful of drugs it worked and
and he could practice medicine he knew
what he could do and what he couldn't do
now there's 6,000 drugs there's 4,000
medical devices and procedures it is
just it's nothing that you know these
original Doc's that establish this sort
of ethos of the doctor of the sovereign
of intellectual autonomy it doesn't look
like that anymore they cannot know it
all they can't know all this data so
this is the Strafford information that
we need to you know that we need to have
a system that that helps these doctors
that shows them this non RCT randomized
control trial data when they can apply
it but that you know that's where we're
at and that's what's there's pockets of
this where you can see it being done but
that's where the whole system needs to
go yeah all right let's go back let's go
back to this tripping over the truth and
let's talk about this you know for one
you know chemotherapy is now the
established the established treatment
method for all cancer and I thought
there was a really wild story about how
chemotherapy was actually discovered and
developed so I was hoping you could
share that and then we'll dive into yeah
best of things yeah so back it was dirt
again during World War two and you know
what was known a cancer at that time was
it was just pathological cell division
so that the problem was these cells and
their brakes have been shut off and they
just were dividing so how do you kill
fast dividing cells and it came sort of
by accident they had there was a war gas
called nitrogen mustard and during World
War Two in the a yes mustard gas right
and they'd sign this the Allies and axis
had signed this agreement to not use it
but both sides were stockpiling it
thinking the other side was and so the
Bari Harbor in Italy the Allies were
there they thought the German air force
was stretched too thin to bomb them they
kind of were you know
coagulated in their thinking the
Luftwaffe wouldn't come near they knew
they were there and they bombed them and
they bombed the USS Harvey which was
stockpiled all this nitrogen mustard gas
it release it all and and the soldiers
got soaked in it and it went over the
town and killed some of the some of the
civilians so that they flew the doctors
over they took back samples from these
soldiers that had died and what they
noticed is their lymph cells and white
blood cells were depleted so they had
this sudden idea well here's an agent
that could possibly treat leukemias
because there's no way to cut leukemias
out you know there's no no treatment
whatsoever for leukemias mm-hmm so they
started a clinical trial and they just
injected war gas into the veins and you
can imagine what that does you know to
somebody and those are the the same sort
of side effects were associated with
chemo today it's gotten much better but
that was the treatment paradigm would
just try to find this knife's edge of
toxicity where the patient doesn't quite
die but you might kill off the majority
or some of these cancer cells and I
think one of the interesting points you
make is that this paradigm of the
treatment being actually coming from a
war gas and being like you're you like
you're going into war against your body
created this whole idea in the zeitgeist
of the war on cancer because why else
would you bear such a cost unless it was
a war yeah like it's the only way we're
storytelling animals right like the only
way you can make sense that you're
curing yourself as if you're going into
war yeah with with an agent that you
need to kill at all costs and then then
you're willing to take the mustard gas
and whatever chemotherapy agent
equivalent we have you're like well this
is war and that the vernacular think you
know he put up a good fight yeah I was
with him in the battle you know and and
that's what's so interesting when you
frame cancer differently is if you look
at it as a metabolic disease and you
reconfigure this idea of how you treat
it and now it's not a battle it's about
changing sort of the environment like
and Tom Safe Routes always says you
should come out on the other side
healthier than when you came in so you
know hopefully we can get to that point
and that was something that you know
Otto Warburg was on to early like that
idea
of what was the fertile ground that
allowed this cancer flower to blossom
right like what was that what were the
conditions that caused it like he and
he's when was his heyday it was like
early 20th century right 1924 he made
this discovery the cancer cell was just
had this metabolic dysregulation so it
just was had this voracious appetite for
sugar and and would not take sugar and
then burn it oxidatively in the
mitochondria with oxygen it would just
kick out lactic acid and there's no
reason the cancer cell should be doing
this this is something normal cells
don't do so why is a cancer cell doing
this and he he died in 1970 he was never
really able to answer that question and
that's where you know this this his
original theory was brought back to life
by Tom Seyfried who shows there there
and this is the center of debate he
claims that the mitochondria
extraordinarily damaged and they just
don't work and that's what Otto Warburg
always said but the crux of it is is
that even if that's a trigger the damage
to the mitochondria but you see this
this consistent shift in the cancer cell
towards this metabolic phenotype and
everyone describes cancer is this
disease of chaos but it's doing all
these systematic things right so when
you as cancer is such a most diseases
you can describe by one thing seed if
it's an infection sure but cancer is
just it's a narrative and so I think in
my you know in my opinion when you look
at everything and tally it up the the
reason we haven't made progress is we
still describe it as an exclusively
genetic disease when it's better
described as a metabolic or epigenetic
disease and there's crossover nobody
argues it you know these mutations
aren't important it's just that they
cannot be a comprehensive explanation
for the whole disease so in this
metabolic theory basically the if let's
suppose that the mitochondria aren't
able to utilize oxygen to produce energy
because mitochondria responsibilities to
produce the energy for the body to
survive if the mitochondria aren't able
to do that through through weakening
through damage they aren't able to do
that at the proper rate
then they revert to an alternate method
like this is like the back-up generator
battery well what's the back-up
generator well we can ferment glucose
but the moment they switch to the
back-up generator they lose
communication with the rest of the body
yeah right and they just go rampantly
like we got to survive we got a ferment
glucose that's the way that our cells
are gonna operate losing coherence with
the organism and which has really made a
lot of sense like well alright so then
instead of the instead of the war on
these on this thing what if you assume
that ok the cells are smart they know
that they can't get an adequate amount
of energy produced through their
mitochondria so they're doing the next
intelligent thing as individual
organisms whose prerogative it is to
survive yeah you know they're doing the
thing they need to do to survive but
they're not aware that they're not in
communication with the rest of the
organism so they're actually going to
cause their own demise but they're just
thinking about the life of their own
cell and they're fermenting glucose and
going and reproducing out of control at
this point right but it's like at that
point you're like oh I hear you cancer
like I've got some problems with my
mitochondria like I see what you're
doing like you don't need to do that let
me fix my mitochondria and you're good
yeah you know and it's like instead of
like having this antagonistic approach
be like ok cancer like I hear you you
know like you're putting up the flag got
it now let's see what we can do to help
solve the condition and it seemed like
there was pretty compelling evidence
from the strategies that you were
discussing in there that doing some
things that rehabilitate the
mitochondria to a certain degree and
improve their health we're pretty
[__] effective yeah yeah and we're
learning more more that you describe
that really beautifully by the way that
and that goes back when you we look at
life on the you know the earth 4 and 4.6
billion years ago life started about 4
billion and was single-celled organisms
for most of the tenure on the planet
then the one event that allowed us
complex organisms to evolve was the
mitochondria a symbiotic relationship
where one bacteria ate
and one became the mitochondria and so
that linkage is what signed the contract
for cells to operate in a collective and
the way you described it was reverting
back to that original prerogative which
is just replicated immortality divided
divided they just tear up the contract
to live within the collective you know
that's that's a great narrative
description of what the you know the
prime sort of mechanism behind cancer
and and so yeah the way you treat it
restoring mitochondrion that oxidative
metabolism that then communicates to
come back to the collective you know you
when you fast before chemo we're now
learning
Walter long ago at Valter Longo UCLA you
set up this beautiful differentiates you
get into ketosis quickly the 72-hour
fast your healthy cells are made more
robust your cancer cells are weakened
because you're draw blood sugar and
they're having to shift metabolism and
then you give you can give lower doses
of chemo and they're just sensitized the
cancer cells are sensitized to die and
then you can measure the side effects
from the chemo and the healthy cells and
every one of them is diminished and the
objective ones that you can count so the
number of times the patient throws up
goes from like ten a day to zero so it
works you know just a fast who knew well
of course it makes such [__] perfect
sense right all right
these cells are fermenting glucose to
survive yeah alright so the press
strategy because you talk about the
press impulse the press strategies to
put pressure on them
hey no glucose anymore buds you know
sorry about that and then you come in
with an agent that kills off the weakest
well the ones that are the weakest so
they're going to be the ones that are
dependent on the thing that you're no
longer providing which is glucose and so
those ones die faster and the patient
recovers like quickly because the other
healthy cells are still using utilizing
mitochondria for energy they can still
use oxygen right and we're not starving
the body of oxygen at all in fact then
the next part of the strategy comes in
okay instead of starving the body of
oxygen if that's what's actually
supporting healthy mitochondria let's
compound the oxygen yeah through
hyperbaric treatments yeah and it makes
me wonder like
so that you know this collective the
cancer cells living and in the healthy
cells you're all competing for blood
glucose and and I always think of Lance
Armstrong you found out that he he was
actually riding his bike his trainer
wall he was taking chemo you know so he
was creating this environment that these
healthy cells are just they're out
competing the cancer cells for every
nutrients crap so I wonder - how much we
could you know we've always told
patients to just lay down don't don't be
stressed you know you'd want to but I
wonder if you created that more of a
competition between the healthy cells
and the cancer cells that you'd even get
more a bang for your buck well it could
be just that the that you're absorbing
more glucose to just really closer to a
lower blood sugar state because you go
for a walk now after your after a heavy
dinner
your blood Sugar's gonna drop you know
even a walk right right like just like
simple these are these are fat all of
this is like research facts so that
could be it is out competing for
nutrients of course but it also could be
just the effects of metabolic effects of
starving these cancer cells of their
primary source of fuel which is sugar
simple simple too simple too simple for
a trillion dollar industry right and
that's the profits most of these
therapies are free you can't patent them
right so how you know an oncologist
who's already too busy it's actually
literally free of fast that's like it's
the freest thing it's the for the freest
thing you can possibly do a healthy diet
least you got to pay for food right fast
you good that's it yeah literally you
drink you gotta drink water and breathe
air ready go does insurance cover that I
don't know it cost nothing you don't
need to file the claim you're good but
in but then the research is panned out
and that's the other thing too is like
for people who are you know because the
doctors there's so much fear and there's
so much fear and so much hope and the
stakes are so high it's gonna be tough
to change even the patient's mind about
what to do but something like when you
show the research of okay you can still
have your chemotherapy but just if you
fast beforehand look at how much better
it works yeah you know that's something
that I think like everybody can get on
board
yeah you know all right fasting is a
little bit annoying but guess what so it
cancers way worse so if this shows that
it's gonna work and all you got to do is
fast for three days before this and it's
gonna show these dramatic improvements
like it should be the absolute standard
of care but how many oncology places are
actually recommending this oh I bet low
for single digits if any you know I'm a
some are but it's it's you know nowhere
near the majority right yeah and that's
and that's sad and then you have to look
at why is it the stubbornness of the
mind is it or is it you know something
where the actual monetary value of these
cancer treatments being prolonged like
and you talk about all of the
unnecessary chemotherapy that's given at
the end of life which I think was it
monger who talked about it was like you
know almost nothing short of evil
because it had no benefit yeah and it
just completely deteriorated the quality
of life in people who had no chance of
survival rung up the tab but at the cost
of someone's life and their family and
their ability to it like peacefully live
out their last days yeah and then
compared to people who got palliative
care which is just a support group you
know helping you deal with the fact you
you know you could die and just coming
to terms with what's happening the
people who got palliative this was
published in the New England Journal of
Medicine who got palliative care most of
them for went the end of life like Hail
Mary chemo most people that other people
take and live longer on average two
months longer so that a better ending it
didn't bankrupt the system and and
that's you know that's another thing
that I tried to show incurable this
human side of medicine that goes to our
core DNA we know now is one of there's
another just low-hanging fruit that
we've really you know it's it's a
complex how to address it but it's it's
there yeah and and the other thing is is
that you mentioned we're really good at
screening now so ultrasounds for
prostate cancer mammograms so we've
gotten really good at
acting early stage cancer and so what
the hell do you do then though okay you
your prostate looks you know your PSA is
high you could have cancer that he says
the word or she then the patient panics
and wants treatment what's the treatment
look like well it's surgery or chemo
it's caustic this is another this is a
great spot where these metabolic
therapies would be perfect right the
response is proportional to this vague
idea you could have cancer and most of
these tumors are benign and won't do
anything because we're really good at
detecting Murli but the death rates have
not budged yeah so that's another
another good spot for these or these you
know worrisome pre pre cancers that they
don't have any good answer how to treat
you said that in two thousand eight
seventy thousand women were over
diagnosed with breast cancer yeah that
was a study done seven thousand women
were over so what does that mean that
means what mastectomies that means
chemotherapy that means all kinds all
yeah and PSA if the the people they're
men that get diagnosed with prostate
cancer PSA levels are forty seven times
more likely to get treatment so
radiation surgery or chemo then they are
to have their life extended it's hard to
get your head around that but yeah so
the that's why monger said you know he
crosses out the PSA every time his
doctor doctor puts it on the line yeah
because he doesn't want him to do
anything silly you said yeah I don't
want to do anything stupid
save that fact again so if you get
diagnosed with prostate cancer from a
PSA you're forty seven times more likely
to get treatment surgery radiation or
chemo than you are to have your life
extended well it's kind of it's a weird
fact so the treatment doesn't actually
extend the life right and in treating
you're more likely to do it even though
it doesn't extend your life right so you
the take home is you're treating cancers
that are probably not going to have any
hope I need any threat to you they're
benign tumors it could make sense
because prostates are involved in boners
and men would rather do anything and
lose the chance of having a boner which
the surgery can make you lose the chance
oh really
wrong I mean come on people get it
together
save your boners [__] a new prostate
campaign that's wild all right so you
see you see all this stuff briefly
though so there was the obviously the
ketogenic diet there's the hyperbaric
oxygen increasing the oxygen
availability in the in the blood cells
that's that's the core of the press
pulse theory for metabolically treating
cancer you also mention some drugs that
were interesting investigational drugs
like three BP and there's another one
that I forgot towards the end of the
book that actually might have even been
better what are your thoughts on those
now I know some time has passed since
the book are you still bullish on these
kind of metabolic drug treatments yeah
three BP the patent holder yonko from
Johns Hopkins she's finally got a looks
like a deal with a pharmaceutical
company to go through trials and they're
gonna set up I think three or four
different trials so that's in the works
finally there's all kinds of different
repurposed drugs that show this kind of
metabolic activity like metformin his
one statins which you know have an
indication for cardiac disease you look
at the data and their problem I would
never
most people were terrible for cardiac
disease most people wouldn't recommend
it for cardiac but they for cancer
they're extraordinary in the right
circumstances we'll talk about metformin
first because that's I'm rating a
different mechanism both metformin and
the statins are guys from two different
issues right so you want right so that's
the goal of any type of the therapy is
to hit this hit it at every angle you
can so metformin is a weird drug it
lowers blood glucose but it's doing more
than that to the cancer cells it's it's
we don't even know all the mechanisms
but it's somehow whatever oxidative
phosphorylation they have left it
targets that and statins they they
they're you know what they call plio
trophic molecules so they hit all
different kinds of pathways they're very
anti inflammatory cancer cells really
rely on cholesterol synthesis for their
membranes they use it as signaling so
when you cut down that internal
manufacturer of cholesterol you're
targeting the game so and when you put
these in combination that's when the
data
is really interesting when you look in
people that are on statin metformin
together prescribed for other reasons
their their hazard ratios so their their
rates of developing cancer drop
dramatically like over 50% in a lot of
cases it's really yeah it's really
interesting because statins were
developed because people thought that
cholesterol caused heart disease and
then they're like whoops yeah that's a
cholesterol doesn't cause heart disease
it's only certain types of cholesterol
causes heart disease and really that
cholesterol is formed from actually
having too much sugar
so like that hold all of that research
came out so then statins are like you
know that's kind of like a bad word when
I was reading that I was like oh well
but cancer uses cholesterol in a
specifically different way right so
that's why it's an effective off-label
tree on it for that and then the
metformin made sense from the just
general metabolic Theory I mean they may
have other mechanisms of action too but
like the general metabolic theory of
lowering blood glucose right exactly so
both of those are kind of operating in
its way and that what's one of the other
things you were talking about and
curable is all right so you have these
drugs that you know are around and
available but what's the incentive to do
new trials on these new drugs for new
things when the patent has already
expired yeah right because there's
nobody who actually benefits from the
generics you know the generic the
generic drug actually who owns the
generic drug oh I think there's various
yeah so all kinds of internets but
there's not enough of a focused interest
like when you have a patented drug you
got twenty years there's a focused
interest on expanding the market as much
as possible so they'll do the research
if they still got the patent yeah but
something like metformin that's been out
nobody owns the patent so it'd be like
basically like all the milk which is
kind of cool when like milk does an
advertisement you know like I brought to
you--by milk and you're like whose milk
that's cool like all the milk people got
together like brought to you by beef and
you're like gratz incredible cooperation
like I really appreciate that
cooperation you know and I guess that
would be the way they don't have to be
unless the government was willing to
sponsor it or charitable enterprises
were willing to sponsor it you know it
would have to be the generic metformin
collective yeah that put together the
study to expand the off-label use of
metformin knowing that it's gonna get
right around to all of the people
providing the generics yeah yeah and
that could be that could be the way but
one way or another we gotta find the
avenues whether it's through charitable
enterprise or whether it's through
government intervention or whether it's
through you know like all the cattle
farmers getting together and putting a
beef commercial on the [__] Super
Bowl like whatever whatever that
whatever works we got to find a way to
like start expanding the research yeah
yeah and there's no good answer to that
you're right it's it's they call
financial orphans they're off patent no
one's got an incentive to do that to do
the big trial to get FDA approval
there's a snow incentive so it'd have to
be that's what you think government
would step in and sponsor that those
kind of trials because who benefits from
that we do the people do it's like
building the interstate highway system
you know it's a one-time layout and then
it's a five cent pill they could affect
outcomes for everybody you know but but
these you know the government is is
really entrenched to get back to these
cognitive biases is entrenched in this
gene theory and there's a kind of a pro
innovation bias then what's next in the
pharmaceutical world you know targeted
therapies now there's Carty which is
half a million dollars they take out
your blood cells and re-engineer them
and then check them back in so it's
always going towards more expensive more
complex treatments when we have these
wonderful treatments that are dirt cheap
that just kind of sit there in languish
yep and you know all of the all of the
different biases that exist in even
government spending right like we're
like hey like US government like we're
not gonna get in a land war again you
know like we can shift our spending on
some of these [__] bombs and stuff
like we're good you know a couple
nuclear submarines and no one's gonna
[__] land on Canada and come this way
you know what I mean like we're good
we're good
you know it's but still like the
spending is and I'm not saying like cut
all military spending I understand that
there's a purpose for the military and
it's important to have it but like the
excess that we're spending on some stuff
like that is just like well how about we
study the things that are that could
cure Americans which are then costing
all of this money
we're wasting in the MENA side as you
said it's like one of the biggest
expenditures in the whole nation in far
as you know output like let's spend a
little money doing this and then let's
take that money that we save from
spending a little money doing this and
then we can maybe spend that on
education or I don't know something cool
like that like there's so much
opportunity if people could just start
to switch their mind a little bit you
know the amount of wealth in this
country I mean we spend more at what
than the next ten countries combined
the military spending it's insane
there's a there's an art museum in
Baltimore at a spiral staircase it
showed and it's know like the spending
on the railing as you went up and it was
like education is a little like two
steps and you know agriculture and then
you you just go wine and wine up the
military and health care now is I think
over three trillion dollars in churn in
the American economy so it's about I'll
get you know nearing 20 percent and it's
estimated that 50% of that is waste so
overtreatment fraud all in that bucket
of waste if you could chip away that say
40 percent no that's trillion and a half
dollars that you could spend on schools
or just making the citizenry more happy
yeah enriching our lives and you show
examples of this like in McAllen the
access and you know there was this kind
of culture of money that developed where
everybody was like ah send them for an
extra cat scan ah you know let's you
know let's cut in here and see what's
going on and let's run these expensive
tests and everybody was just running up
this huge tab and it was actually far
higher than the nation's average and
when investigative journalists came in
there yeah they had this huge expose so
people went to jail people figured it
out and McAllen actually dropped down
and is now one of the more efficient
yeah you know cities around there but
the same thing can happen from both
greed which is the McAllen story and
then in the reading story it was all
about fear right it was like the fear of
heart disease
yeah everybody getting these
preventative stints in their heart yeah
it's crazy we the way we incentivize
doctors the fee for service they get
paid for every treatment and procedure
they do so the obvious incentive is to
over treat you know
and it just creeps in that direction
over time and you can show this very
easily you know you put more back
surgeons in a County the number of back
surgeries go up and in the you know that
the outputs don't go up so it just you
do the math it just means a lot of
people are getting unnecessary surgeries
yeah so self-insured companies are kind
of figuring this out Walmart's one that
if a if an employee has back pain they
won't they'll fly them to the Mayo
Clinic because the docs err on salary so
they have you know incentive this
patient doesn't need a back surgery they
won't do it and that's and that's
actually the rep one of the revolutions
in health care that actually people have
took you know took it in their own hands
like you know the the Berkshire Hathaway
founders who probably control one of the
biggest conglomerates including Walmart
and every and all of these other
enterprises they decided they're like
all right you know this is broken we're
gonna go and fix it yeah and that's
something that's it's so what's the
process of development in that and that
is doctors who are on salary so there's
no fee-for-service oh yes there to treat
and it's implementing a lot of these
like checklists and best practices that
can make like really dramatic
improvement there was some study that
there was like a forty five percent
chance of of forty seven percent
reduction in death rate just by adding a
surgical checklist that takes two
minutes two minutes yeah two minutes
checklist and forty seven percent less
people die if you fill out this
checklist like we don't we don't get
like that this is just a job that you
know it's an important job but like it's
our life but the doctors may just forget
something they may be thinking about
their date later like they're human
beings
and they do this every day so the
tolerance to this thing is this is their
everyday thing so having something like
a checklist so we don't we can't put
them up on this pedestal of like they're
gonna be solely focused and and
maniacally you know like maybe they need
a checklist like everybody would you
know like we have a checklist for when
we release content it's not you know or
like everybody has a checklist for when
they do okay here's here's the steps to
follow
for when you do a product launch here's
the steps to follow for when you do this
here's the steps to follow for surgery
and guess what half the half the less of
the people are gonna die yeah yeah I was
shocked when you look at every arena of
human activity like you're talking about
sports the stock market you know people
have gotten really clever at noticing
how the human brain works and trying to
find workarounds checklists you know
picking players on statistics rather
than a than a an antiquated talent scout
that's guessing but when you look at
medicine it is lagging so far behind on
in that because we always had this
culture of the doctor was this sovereign
nation of autonomy and you can't creep
in on that autonomy at all by telling
him to do a checklist you know god no no
you can't do that so the the ones that
are really knocking out of the park like
Intermountain health care in Utah they
work the system as part of the
integration so the system is helping the
doctors and there's backlash you know
the doctors don't like it some of the
time but they found ways to work
together and they it's the simple [__]
it's like it's like checklist and it's
like timing of surgical antibiotics and
it's just watching the doctors and
seeing who's doing it the best giving
them accolades and then they put peer
pressure and the other ones you know
they create this environment of
excellence and they Intermountain is
about 40 percent less 40 percent more
efficient than the national health care
so if we could just be as good as them
we cut this by you know this huge but
thing by 40 percent yeah yeah I mean
some of those things that you're talking
about like okay so antibiotics are the
approved standard treat you know
standard of care for anybody who's going
into surgery because it's there's germs
especially in the hospital even if you
sterilize it and you're open and they're
gonna be healing so but when is the best
time to do it yeah that's a good [__]
question yeah you know and then finally
like I whether Intermountain or one of
the other you know kind of proactive
groups they were like oh
two hours beforehand is the best time it
wasn't hard to figure out you just
looked at the retic record system and
did it yeah and then all of a sudden
alright now we know okay two hours
before and then there's other like
interesting
dated to about like the that intravenous
aspirin Carol accent sounded like the
always Carol act or whatever that that
thing is yeah that's fascinating that is
that's again this low-hanging fruit that
we just don't capitalize on so early
most breast cancers are diagnosed early
like seventy five percent are diagnosed
at the primary stage so when you go in
and do surgery which you you see this
spike and recurrence about one year and
then it goes back down the question is
why is there that spike and so when you
think about the active surgery you're
going in there there's cancer in there
and you're creating this wound right
you're cutting and so what there's a
very you know stereotypical responsive
body does you have you have a plate
let's go there to stop the bleeding they
release growth factors to enhance the
healing and these growth factors are
what cancer relies on too as fuel
so you're basically creating this
perfect environment for the remaining
cancer cells and there's a really there
was an experiment than fifty years ago
these two brothers they injected exactly
fifty cancer cells into the portal vein
of rats and the portal vein goes right
to the liver and they opened up the rats
about three months later and there was
no no liver cancer they repeated the
experiment but this time they just did
it an incision across the belly and
repeated that every two weeks then when
they opened up the the Bell or looked at
the levers at three months it was just
exploded with tumors so the take-home is
that this wound process is fueling the
cancer and that's why we see the spike
at one at one year and so this grad
student had an idea well is there
something you could do to kind of
prevent that spike it's an inflammatory
process yeah so the wound is actually
creating a pro inflammation right right
so there's once in a while patients will
get this shot of Carol AK which is just
an N sad it's a non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory and they do it mostly
because it mitigates morphine use after
the surgery and so it's not done all the
time but when you look at those patients
got this shot there's a 70% reduction in
recurrence that's huge that's that's a
$10 shot and all this you know there is
their debate about doing that but
there's still debate it doesn't get it's
not standard to care
it's not you know and it's a
retrospective study so it's not it's
looking back a date and not going
forward but I don't you know when you
look at it there's no reason to not do
that yeah I mean I mean the other the
hypothesis of why as a retrospective it
wouldn't work would be that you're not
randomizing it for the placebo effect
well they got a million [__] things
going on they're not gonna be like I got
that Kara luck I'm gonna be good those
cancers not coming back I'm certain you
know like that would be the hypothesis
of why you would need the double-blind
clinical trial it's sick old standard
right it's like not like to think that
people are gonna be like oh man I got
that aspirin yeah I'm gonna be
cancer-free you know and [__] signal
all their genes and epigenetics to be
healthy the rest of their life cuz I got
that one shot now I'm [__] golden you
know because it's not like the doctors
are telling him like hey you're getting
this thing they're like this will help
with your morphine not like they're like
we're gonna give you this you're not
gonna get cancer ever again and the
patient's like really you know which
would be a [__] you know that would
that would make sense but that's not
what was happening you know that yeah
you look for those confounders and there
are no obvious ones there and you look
at other studies to look back
retrospective like the British doctors
study the first broke that smoking was
bad for you and the prospective study
then matched perfectly with the
retrospective data yeah so there's kind
of a bias towards that that data that's
on you know unfounded yeah the the next
interesting thing that you're talking
about so we're talking about all of
these different you know kind of cancer
treatments treatments for the gut biome
which could affect all kinds of things
improve including like your mindset
anxiety depression all of these
different like so many revolutions in it
but in interestingly there was another
absolutely free treatment for longevity
that is really surprising I actually
talked about it a little bit in my book
but like one of the top determining
factors of longevity is done Tanana
drumroll Travis please your social life
your social life yeah your [__]
social life when you go through that's a
great part of the book curable when you
go through all of those centenarians
supercentenarians that people who lived
over a hundred and lived over 110 and
you go through and they're like how'd
you do it and ones like three dr.
peppers a day and the other ones like
twelve cigars a day and a nipple whiskey
and there's like like all of these
different people and even that woman
even that one woman's like who was like
a hundred and twenty or something and it
was like a clue she's like I don't know
my life sucked I was hoping I died way
earlier but God's punishing me I guess
you know like it wasn't even positive
attitude at that point it was like but
then you look at a place like Sardinia
which is one of the blue zones they call
where like people are living way longer
and you start to like look and there's
other statistics too but you start to
look at all right well maybe it's the
olive oil but then why are they higher
than all of the rest of Italy if it's
the olive oil or like you can like look
at these things and then you really take
a look at it and you find it's because
they're built their homes right on top
of each other and everybody's just
hanging out all the yeah it's it's you
know I guess it was never appreciated
how corrosive loneliness is and now when
you know we can snow it's study about
its social genomics so when you look at
somebody who reports they're lonely
versus somebody who reports or you know
happy and have a good social life you
look at their 23,000 genes 209 of them
are expressed differently and then you
look at those genes and what's going on
and the ones that are upregulated are
the ones involved in the in the initial
inflammatory response so these people
have this kind of low-grade inflammation
which is associated with early death
with cardiovascular disease cancer
everything and the ones that are turned
down or the steering response of the
immune system so the ability to fight
off infections viruses and everything so
their immune systems are compromised
just by feeling lonely so there's this
you know underappreciated kind of
looping system from our perception to
our epigenetics and our truth in the way
our bodies are acting yeah which I you
know intuitively I guess most people
knew this you probably knew this but now
we just see you know you can map it out
well you see that you see the stats and
then and then the that field of social
genomics and an interesting thing is so
it's not there's not like an absolute or
objective amount of loneliness like you
got to spend this and
of time with a person like it's your
perceived loneliness which then goes
into the interesting research of like
you're remembering selfish you're
experiencing self which I want to talk
about but it's your perceived loneliness
that contributes to a 50% increase in
early death right so you could be around
a lot of people but if you still
perceive yourself as lonely for whatever
reason then you're gonna fall in that
category you could be out in nature and
be like [__] Rumi and be like the
trees are my friends yeah like not be
lonely at all even though you're hardly
ever seeing every time you know you're
somebody comes in once a week and like
you give them a hug and have some tea
with them and that's good for you that's
good for your Constitution that you
wouldn't report that person wouldn't
report being lonely well as long as they
don't report being lonely they're not
perceiving themselves as lonely they're
not triggering those epigenetic triggers
which is like the volume knobs on our
gene expression yeah it's a great way
that you put it in the book they're not
triggering that so they're not
contributing to these diminishment of
life expectancy yeah I guess it's a need
you know there's introverts who just
don't need to be around that many people
to not feel lonely and then there's
extroverts or just people that can be in
a crowded room and if you didn't feel
lonely so it's yeah it's an intrinsic
need and I thought it was interesting
that the person you know that I talked
about in the book that lived the longest
john clemente from from france she lived
to be 122 she had she was
extraordinarily active she had a
wonderful life you know her husband she
never had to work her husband was rich
very active but she just didn't have a
need to be around she never professed
ever being lonely and when she was a
hundred and seven no 120 she said I she
told a reporter I dream I think of my
life I'm never bored and people who knew
her would always say she just kind of
had this way about her she just never
really got concerned or she just didn't
handle stress really well so yeah just I
guess somehow cigarettes yeah she smoked
even in ER of retirement home that she
went to it 110 yeah you know she's like
[__] it I'm going yeah and it just makes
friends with a nurse and smokes
cigarettes after every meal in
moderation she had yeah she started when
she was like 20 and smoked till she was
117 I was like one or two after dinner
every night and an end support wine and
dessert it was moderation you know she
was active sure so I get you know the
take home to me was we get so spun up
and what am i doing it right where's my
vitamin D level am I exercising enough
and yet that you know I hate this
[__] cracker today I know it I gluten
in it yes i booting free but i know
there was ID in there I'm gonna die yeah
but those variables are not really what
matters you know obviously in excess
they do but to our to our health and
longevity it's not there yeah it's uh
yeah I think you summed it up it says
don't worry so much have an occasional
dessert or a drink if you want
be active play be moderate engage with
the world and the people around you not
only will you live longer
you'll live better yeah sums it up
mm-hmm
yeah it's a beautiful the science takes
you to a beautiful way to live your life
yeah and it's interesting because you
can tell somebody to eat this eat this
take have your vitamin D level here but
you can't tell somebody how to not be
lonely so you enter this you know this
world where health becomes kind of
artistic or a pursuit and also like
social engineering starts to become
interesting like what and and what one
interesting thing that you were pointing
out is that actually loneliness is
increasing with each new generation
perceived loneliness is increasing
potentially this is related to the
proliferation of social media and the
isolation that we feel based upon that
who knows but also like depression
suicide rates a lot of these different
things that come from comparing
ourselves to other and maybe actually
instead of having getting together and
meeting up we're just texting everybody
all the time which is creating this
sense of loneliness the body doesn't
fully recognize that as community yeah
so like re-engineering and re
understanding this idea of community and
how you gather and what reasons you
gather for and like may you know like
that's a really interesting thing that's
gonna have a dramatic impact you know
like there's a billion biohacking
summits you know all over the all over
the nation in world but like how about
like social you know the community
building some is like hey how do we
hang out more with each other yeah what
are the how can we form bonds with
people that and how can we re engineer
like the way we live and how we you know
cultivate these you know environments
where we aren't lonely yeah and and I
think I put a quote in there from Thomas
Jefferson who said that the duty of
government is the happiness of the
citizenry you know in our government
they they don't consider happiness in
the citizenry but the UK they're
actually consider that as a metric for
how they operate and that really should
be you know the way they should it
should be a consideration how do you
design a society to be to you know do
you say utopia but just to be better
yeah yeah
well that's a [__] up question though
because as Kahneman one of the
researchers who you talk about who
studied happiness for like what three
decades you know he was trying to figure
out what makes somebody happy and then
finally he just kind of threw his hands
up was like I mean I don't know people
people are people like leave me alone it
does sort of seem like you kind of got
to the conclusion because happiness is
such an ephemeral thing and what he did
is he described the difference between
the experiencing self like I am happy
right now
versus the remembering self which
recalls your personal history in your
life data and decides whether you are
happy based on certain things that stick
out in your story yeah you know it's
like the people you had a study in there
of the people who won the Oscar lived
way longer than the people who actors of
the same you know variety who didn't win
an Oscar you know like why is that yeah
why is winning the Oscar having a little
getting the nod from well perhaps
they're remembering self remembered
their life as happier like an Oscar yeah
you know I was like I really did it yeah
and yeah Kahneman had it clear when you
read his work on happiness he had a
clear but why shouldn't say bias but he
he really thought that the experiencing
self was more important so and when you
make sense because am I happy writing
right now yeah sure yeah that seems to
be valuable right right and that's he
it's a really interesting way to look at
him so he divides up a new experience
itself and remembering self and most of
the data is on when you ask somebody are
you happy it
automatically engages remembering so if
you think of your life and so you're
really reporting on your your life
narrative but if you ask somebody in
this very moment are you happy now
you're engaging the experiencing self so
he did studies where they had timers and
beepers and you'd ask some people
throughout the day are you happy in this
moment to get a reflection of what the
experiencing self is going through but
but the what what he shows is the
remembering self so like when you reel
back to your life
what do you see do you see you see
regret or do you seek success that turns
out to be the one that's in charge so
when you decide what you're gonna do
tomorrow where you're going to go on
vacation you're really engaging the
remembering self and the remembering
self is mostly motivated by [__] so
so what's so material things right your
social media feed when you're on
vacation instead of just being there in
the moment but then you know and that
seems very kind of intuitive and obvious
but then you look at that that Oscar
study which shows that there's there's
actually impact to people that are
accepted the remembering self right this
is acceptance from the Beehive somehow
penetrates you and you know confers
health so they're not they're
intertwined but they're you know they
are you can look at them as separate but
there's obviously some there weave
together in some weird way it's kind of
like that perceived loneliness thing
right like if you have you perceive
yourself as like it's whether you
perceive yourself as happy whether
you're happy or not is actually one of
the biggest contributors to this that
you know and that the remembering self
whether you remember yourself as happy
or whether that actually matters because
that's what signaling your genes
constantly that's what's actually being
that's what is the epigenetic trigger
it's that state of you know it because
those month and it makes sense in this
in a way because these moments are
fleeting fleeting fleeting fleeting
fleeting but what's the constant
pressure the constant pressure on your
epigenetic triggers is what you remember
about your life am I always on stress am
I always in trouble am I always sad am I
always lonely am I always this you know
like that's kind of like the constant
state that you're signaling in the
background whereas actually the
immediate
flowy state you know whatever that is
maybe isn't persistent enough to
actually cause as much impact unless it
actually confers to your remembering
self yeah and then you can actually but
the remembering self like you said is
ineffective you know it's a it's a it's
a narrative based thing that remembers
beginnings significant moments and ends
of stories and you have like interesting
like water temperature studies where
like the water heats up at the very end
of people immersing their hands and cold
water and even though they're in there
longer they're like oh that was nice
yeah you know it's like it was
interesting wasn't it right because it's
like the end of the story was what his
movie was was more important than
actually the amount of pain that they
actually felt yeah yeah we're [__] up
[__] up we're [__] up and it's in
it's uh I think the key to actually
anytime that any one realizes like the
state that we're in is just being able
to observe without judgment and be like
okay yeah cool we're all [__] up and
that's okay now let's look at this let's
observe it I mean I think that's what
you know that's what Munger was doing
really like that's what that's what they
were doing when they were taking a look
at this or like Wow alright we're [__]
up and that excites me like how were we
[__] up let's look at this and let's
see like what are the things that are
causing the problems and fix those first
you know like what's the thing that's
making things worse rather than what can
we do to make it better like all right
well let's look at what's making it
worse well all of these cognitive biases
all these things that's making it worse
yeah that's a good place to start
yeah and I think with your health that
that kind of inverse rule of problem
solving is is important we always think
I don't feel good what should I add in
what can I take right you know it should
be what what is what can I take away
that's causing that you know it's a good
rule I think to live by just to solve
problems looking at them from that that
kind of underbelly direction mm-hmm well
I can't encourage people more to read
these books I mean all these things that
we talked about like the studies you
have all the studies all the
descriptions you know available in here
for people who are
the data adds and like looking to get in
and the things that you'll find are just
absolutely shocking I mean there's I
have a list of 27 things here and we've
gotten through like half of them but
little things that I'll never forget
like 7,000 people die every year from
sloppy physician handwriting 7,000
people [__] what that's your grandma or
your mom or like and it's like they use
an iPad yeah like for real you know like
you can fix 7,000 lives like I put a saw
something posted from Tim Kennedy the
other day 3,000 people died in 9/11
8,000 people died in all in the war on
terror on our side as soldiers okay
seven thousand people a year are dying
look how look how much of a [__]
disproportionate like you know we're so
that was like such a big deal like yeah
granted it was it's [__] horrible but
7,000 people here are dying from sloppy
handwriting we can type like like that's
all you need to do is type and you like
fix that problem
you know like 200,000 Americans died
because of some other kind of medical
there so like what are the efficiencies
there yeah and all the money that's
being weds like so many of these
different things did you start to look
at any like man come on like we can we
can do better we really can yes you got
to end on a positive note right positive
no and you did a beautiful beautiful job
of that yeah and you know when I was
writing that book everything let I
didn't touch in there like what do we do
single-payer how do we solve it and
everything when I was writing it led
towards a single-payer does this seemed
like that makes the most sense and you
can you can eliminate a ton of ways by
going single-payer you know just like
that
what is single-payer so so a
single-payer system like like a national
health care system like the NHS in
England or Canada has where the gum
everybody's insured in the government
pays mm-hmm and you know that's that's
part of the debate right now the
Democrat most of the Democrats are for
single-payer and it does make sense you
know but then when you look around in
the US especially there's these pockets
of incredible innovation
so these health like boutique health
care companies are popping up like Verta
health they do a ketogenic diet for type
2 diabetes it's value based so the
employer or the payer only pays if they
get results and there's there's
literally hundreds of these kind of
companies cropping up Intermountain
health is just a you know I'd rather go
there so much more than the UK icing or
the Canada so there's these huge pockets
innovation in the US now how do we kind
of merge those two how do we take care
of everybody but when you go to a single
payer you homogenized everything and you
kind of you lose those wonderful
vicissitudes of capitalism thrives on
you know you kind of you can't really
bake innovation in there too well yeah
so how do you you know that that's a
huge problem and I don't know the answer
to that but that you know that's the
conundrum or at how do we solve this
thing yeah it's interesting because you
get to that you know which would be a
gigantic bureaucratic machine and then
innovation is gonna come really slow
yeah but it solves a lot of problems
carb lunch right off the right off the
bat you know like all the
fee-for-service issues all the
discrepancies in medical care across the
board and but like you said then it
maybe maybe prevents the innovation that
could really radically transform
healthcare and like lead the example for
the whole rest of the world so that's
that's a question that you know probably
somebody with some more Moneyball kind
of answers than us all our cognitive
biases actually well that's what I'm
hoping we're know that the Berkshire
they got Atul Gawande as a CEO and he's
a brilliant brilliant guy yeah so that's
when to look at to see what they do yeah
you know maybe that maybe they'll get it
right maybe they'll do it well the you
know the that's the thing when problems
become bad enough solutions tend to
arise and that's unfortunately one of
the ways that people move into action is
at the point where things are really so
shitty yeah that that we have to change
and maybe that's the that's the silver
lining of the system that we've created
is like oh yeah we made it so [__]
that now we're gonna be forced to
innovate because we can't bear the cost
anymore at scale the more people we have
the more people that are
getting sick that money alone isn't
going to be there the work efficiency is
gonna be that we're gonna we're gonna
rot from the inside out so to speak as
an as a nation unless we fix this
healthcare crisis that we have which may
be the thing that's causing the
innovations like with the birth kit the
Berkshire Group yeah you know w okay
okay okay got it yeah like we got to
come up with some different different
solutions and it seems like that's
happening and that's the encouraging
yeah that's the encouraging factor yeah
yeah it's I think one in five people now
have medical debt yeah you know it's
it's it's it's bankrupting the country
so yeah you're right it's unfortunate
that we as a species have to wait till
something's beating us in the face
before we react yeah well fast every
once in a while put someone else's poop
in your but think you know think outside
the box a little bit and uh there's so
much so much to look look forward to in
in what and what we have going on but
not be blinded by the negatives of what
we see as well so I think it's also if
we have that kind of better outlook
we're probably gonna live long ourselves
so we'll be able to help more rather
than if we look at the bleak pessimistic
side of things that was another thing
like there's that study done on people
who wrote their own autobiographies and
the people in the lowest quartile of
those who said we like the least happy
they died ten years earlier than
everybody else right so you know that
that understanding like the scientific
basis for putting yourself in a state of
gratitude looking back like a stoic
would upon their life and saying oh
thank you for my challenges and thank
you for these things like so that you
look at all of these things that have
been challenging in your life and all of
the conditions that were hard and all of
the stuff and you Alka Mies those into
something that you're grateful for
like that's not just for funsies like
that's gonna that's gonna mean you're
gonna live long if you're able to do
that you know if you can say like thank
you for my pain and thanks for my
challenges and thanks for all the [__]
that I've gone through you know like I
really appreciate that because it's made
me stronger and you have that attitude
and you look back at your life and you
go man my life was [__] perfect
because every challenge came and allowed
me the opportunity to get
and we look at the nation being man our
nation went the perfect way because it
got everything so [__] up that we had
to fix it and we innovated and we have
that outlook on life
well at the very least we're gonna be
better off right so that seems to be the
way to go thank you so much for all your
work and all your research and putting
this out there and you know just yeah
keep going and and any help that I can
provide or anything else you know I'm so
behind this cause you know it's uh it's
so important it affects all of us you
know we all know people who have you
know been in the system and suffered the
consequences of the system some people
have had great outcomes and successes as
well it's not all bad you know doctors
are not mean and you know mostly greedy
out to get people and the system is not
conspiring against just you read this
you understand it's just human nature
you know and people are most likely
doing their best you know and that's
another thing to remember too there
there may not be any villain here other
than just human nature I understand it
yeah I understand it well thanks so much
the book is curable it is out when is it
October 3rd October 3rd so I think when
this podcast publishes the book will be
available it's gonna be Amazon Amazon ad
and I'm not sure which bookstores they
got it in but most of the major ones
yeah cool yep and then we have a talk
tonight so we'll have that uh lab that
out as well yeah awesome thank you so
much I appreciate you thanks everybody
peace thanks for tuning in to this
podcast with Travis Kristofferson and I
and please if you know anybody who's
affected by any of these conditions
please share the podcast the information
is there the research is there and one
of those things that we can use both
preventive ly and as a treatment is
ketosis and getting the body to utilize
ketones as an energy and fuel source and
to help enhance and recover
mitochondrial function and one of the
ways that we can do that as kind of a
hack is to use exogenous ketones and
that's adding extra ketones into the
body to prime that system and allow
to reap the benefits of ketone energy
even if you're still having
carbohydrates like a lot of us so that's
why we came out with the total keto
daily from on it it has the exogenous
ketones in there
it has everything else to complement
them and a great flavor it's something
that I'm drinking every single day
because I love the feeling whether I'm
in actual nutritional ketosis through a
restricted ketogenic diet or I just want
to have some of the benefits of the
ketones to keep my brain sharp I mean
that's really where I notice it is
energy and then cognitive ability that's
where I personally just really notice it
the most so I love being in a state of
ketosis and you can actually measure it
with one of those acetone meters one of
those breath pens and it makes a
difference when you take exhaustion as
ketones you'll actually be utilizing
ketones as an energy fuel and one of the
best ways to do that is with these
ketone salts especially something as
delicious as the total keto daily so go
to AA Netcom slash Aubrey save 10% on
total keto daily and just get a feel for
it you know get warmed up get get a
feeling for what it feels like to be in
ketosis I think you guys are gonna dig
it
thanks so much on accom slash Aubry and
once again please share this podcast
with anybody who might benefit from it